finding a coronavirus vaccine is seen as
a key way to defeat the virus and help
get our lives back to normal
until we find a vaccine or effective
treatment
coronavirus will be with us for a long
time to come
vaccines work people who are
vaccinated protect themselves and the
rest
of the population by lowering the spread
and risk
of infection the hope is if one could
make us
immune to coven 19 it could stop people
getting sick
and allow measures like social
distancing to be relaxed
but politicians worry that even if a
vaccine is successfully developed
the next big challenge will be making
sure enough people get it
because there's all these anti-vaxxers
now isn't it well marina can tell you a
little bit about
how we've achieved that what do you
think of anti-vaxxers
a survey by public health wales
suggested one in
10 welsh adults would not want to have a
vaccine if it became available
and 7 said they were unsure and there
are loads of misleading claims about a
potential vaccine going around on social
media
some anti-vaccine posts or comments have
been shared by high-profile celebrities
like madonna and lewis hamilton
madonna later took down an anti-vaccine
post she'd shared on instagram
lewis hamilton also deleted his and
clarified he was not against a vaccine
but a lot of misleading claims just get
shared by ordinary people in social
media groups
people we might know and trust like
friends family members and neighbours
false claims and conspiracy theories
that we've seen spread in social media
groups in wales
include claims the vaccine is an attempt
to microchip us
that it'll change our dna and even that
the whole coronavirus is a hoax
i asked dr richard stanton from cardiff
university to explain
where these claims come from and why
there's no evidence behind them
[Music]
okay so the flu vaccine is one of two
things it's either a weakened flu virus
or a dead flu virus
and that virus cannot cause disease um
and so it's not possible for those
vaccines to
cause the coc19 pandemic and
even if those vaccines were in some way
able to cause the disease they would
cause flu
[Music]
um so this seems to have come out of an
interview that bill gates did where he
talked about digital immunity passports
so here we're talking about if you if
you have a vaccine and you have that
vaccine you are now
hopefully protected from the disease um
you could then carry on your phone a
record of the fact that you've been
vaccinated and therefore you're unlikely
to catch it again
that was sort of put together with
another project that bill gates
foundation did
looking at using invisible tattoo ink to
record people's vaccination history on
their arms largely for use in developing
countries where
vaccination records are not well kept
these kind of two things are put
together along with this idea of
microchipping to
lead to this idea that potentially you
could microchip people via a vaccine
there's no evidence whatsoever that is
happening and although there hasn't been
some discussion
about vaccination passports and they
certainly aren't happening at the moment
and those records in the uk at least
will be held by your gp
rather than by your phone
so we are rushing these vaccines but we
are not skimping on the safety testing
all vaccines go through three phases of
testing phase one phase two and phase
three
and these vaccines are going through the
exact same three phases that all
vaccines go through
the way we're speeding these up is that
normally we would spend a lot of time in
the lab and in the phase one studies
with a large panel of vaccines
testing them all and working out which
one was the best the most effective
before taking it through to the large
phase three trials because those phase
three trials are really expensive
um instead what we're doing here we're
starting with a large panel of vaccines
and we're taking them all
all the way through to phase three the
worry is these misleading claims and
extreme conspiracies could be seen by
people who are just nervous or curious
about a potential vaccine like laura
she told me she didn't want to have a
vaccine because of claims she'd seen
about it
this this whole thing about the vaccine
and injection and stuff
i'm curious i'm hearing this there's
going to be a chip in there
there's going to be um the actual virus
pumping into us
and it's it's quite alarming what i'm
hearing
but i know that's just weird a mate i
wanted to bring
laura and richard together to see if
richard could help
reassure her about some of her concerns
how's it gonna chip in there
so um that no no one is allowed to
implant any chip
into anyone certainly in this country i
imagine in most countries
um without your explicit consent and
no one has ever ever attempted to put a
chip into a vaccine um that they would
then give to the general population it
would be completely illegal to do that
without your consent
um can you explain to me in simple terms
[Music]
what is in the injection the way we make
vaccines
are we throw away the virus genome we
get rid of it it's not
there and we just deal with those bits
of protein
that sit around the genome and protect
it
and what that means is because the
vaccine doesn't have the virus genome
there
it can't grow it can't divide it can't
make more copies of itself
and so what we're doing is we're we're
giving your body
those bits of protein that sit around
you know
that's enough to train your immune
system but there's
no virus gene name there and that means
that
the virus cannot replicate it can't
produce more
viruses and therefore it can't cause any
disease
given what we've just been talking about
as well would you feel more
inclined to want to have one i would
think about it
i'm not saying i would do it i'd think
about it
chris elmore is the mp for ogmore in
south wales and he's also chair of
parliament's all-party group
on social media he wants new plan laws
to tackle online disinformation to go
further by giving regulators more power
to find social media companies
if they don't take down harmful
misinformation
it's an absolute ticking time bomb there
can be no doubt about that at all all
the evidence shows that people
are getting more fearful because of the
information that they're receiving on
social media
and from non-trusted news sources that
they deem the new source to be
trustworthy
therefore they're saying this must be
true this must be correct because it
isn't
the bbc or other broadcasters you know
we're getting it from someone writing
something
on a post it being shared tens of
thousands of times on facebook or
instagram
the government aren't going far enough
they have an online harms paper
that they say is coming in the autumn
that needs to tighten up the issues
around antibiotics campaigning
they need more investment in the
information that's sharing that shows
that vaccines are tested
trialled and are safe and that the
population
should be trusting of scientists that
are developing
and working on vaccine development and
when a vaccine is available it will be
to the highest of standards and will be
safe
the uk government said since the start
of the pandemic
they've been working rapidly to identify
and rebut
false information about coronavirus
including working closely with social
media companies
they also said they're developing plans
to protect people online and will
introduce
legislation as soon as possible but as
we know these misleading claims are
still
really rife on social media richard's
got some top tips for how we can
all separate vaccine facts from fiction
when we see a claim posted online you
can look at the tone that the message
uses
fake news tends to try and evoke a very
emotional response in you to get you to
spread that message to make you angry or
something like that and then it's very
useful if you see a claim to google that
claim the word hoax after it
see if there's information out there
stating that as a hoax and why it's a
hoax
there's some really good fact-checking
websites full fact is a really good
uk-based website and there's also slopes
there's an international website
many of these websites list claims and
they very carefully go through the
evidence for those claims and explain to
you
if the claim is false why it's false
remember if in doubt
don't share a claim that you're not sure
about even if your friends and family
are
instead remember richard's top tips and
always check
claims are coming from a reliable source